---
layout: post
title:  "Production, consumption and capital: Importers and exporters"
short: "Importers and exporters"
date:   2020-11-27 02:00:00 -0800
categories: geography gtap 
homepage: /geography/gtap/
excerpt: "I describe how data on global monetary flows can be used to track how investments stimulate production processes and, under the right assumptions, to track how embodied resources flow from production to consumption."
visible: 1
---

# Production, consumption and capital: Importers and exporters

In this post, I describe how data on global monetary flows can be used to track how investments stimulate production processes and, under the right assumptions, to track how embodied resources flow from production to consumption. We have discussed tracking the ways that irreversible processes *support* consumption, or are *instigated by* investment. What does this mean? 

The first major concept to discuss is that of *endogenous* and *exogenous* sectors of the economy. This is an entirely arbitrary distinction. The SAM and its "circular" flow paradigm make this most evident: money flows from every sector to every other sector, without ever once halting. However, for many purposes it can be useful to divide the economy into particular segments, and to track how resources circulate *within* a segment before eventually exiting into an external segment. 

For our linear consumption paradigm, we consider the sectors **Factors**, **Domestic industry**, **Imports** and **Margins** to all be *endogenous* to the economy, while we consider **Consumption** as well as all purely financial sectors to be *exogenous*. This is because we are interested in the physical processes driving the economy (predominantly represented by the endogenous sectors). For any irreversible process, we can track how it becomes embodied in commodities produced by endogenous sectors, how those embodied resources circulate within the endogenous sectors, and through which region's **Consumption** sectors they finally, eventually exit. In this analysis, the financial sectors are entirely ignored.

For our financial circulation paradigm, we consider all sectors except **Investment** and **Global capital** to be endogenous. We are now interested not only in the direct path from irreversible process to consumption, but how this path fits into the larger financial framework. **Investment** is exogenous because we are treating the choices made by this sector as an independent variable; money injected into the endogenous economy from private investors has a cascade effect in instigating one economic process after another, including physical processes which have irreversible costs. Not carefully minding the exogenous/endogenous divide can be dangerous: it results in double-counting. Suppose **Investment** were itself included in the endogenous economy; then each dollar spent by investors is also eventually treated as a dollar *instigated* by investors.

## From process to consumption

The entire global SAM can be represented by the matrix $$\mathtt{S}_{I,J}$$ where each capital index either represents a region-sector pair $I=(r,i)$ or one of the global sectors (**Global capital** and **Margins**). By indices $$A,B,C$$ we will mean only those sectors corresponding to **Factors**, **Domestic industry**, **Imports** and **Margins**. By $$L,M,N$$ we will refer to sectors corresponding to **Consumption**. It will be useful to define the following matrices:

$$
\mathtt{T}_{B|A} = \frac{\mathtt{S}_{AB}}{\sum_{C} \mathtt{S}_{AC} + \sum_{M} \mathtt{S}_{AM}}
$$

$$
\mathtt{K}_{L|A} = \frac{\mathtt{S}_{AL}}{\sum_{C} \mathtt{S}_{AC} + \sum_{M} \mathtt{S}_{AM}}
$$

That is, $$\mathtt{T}_{B \vert A}$$ is the quantity of money sent directly from endogenous sector $$B$$ to $$A$$, reweighted by all money sent directly to $$A$$ by all endogenous and **Consumption** sectors; similarly $$\mathtt{K}_{L\vert A}$$ is the reweighted quantity of money sent from **Consumption** sector $$L$$ to $$A$$. We interpret these matrices in the following way: if sector $$A$$ receives as physical input a certain amount of resource, we assume that the embodied resource then received by all those sectors which purchase from $$A$$ in proportionate amount to how much they paid to $$A$$. For example, if $$A$$ takes one unit of embodied labor as input, then $$B$$ will receive $$\mathtt{T}_{B\vert A}$$ units of embodied labor from its direct transactions with $$A$$.

This is almost certainly an incorrect assumption. We are really assuming that deviations from this assumption are not only small but roughly cancel each other out. A circumstance in which this would be valid would be if $$A$$ produces, as output, a single homogenous product which all its customers are purchasing. However, if $$A$$ produces many heterogeneous products which are unevenly purchased by customers, this may result in deviations from our approximation.

$$\mathtt{K}_{L\vert A}$$ tracks how much of one unit of resource *input* to $$A$$ is directly purchased by consumer $$L$$ from the output. However, most of $$A$$'s output will often be to other industries, as its product is only part of a larger commodity chain which will take many steps through the endogenous economy before being purchased by a consumer as a final product. This leads to calculating *lifetime flows*: we track the input of resources to $$A$$ from "cradle to grave," that is, from $$A$$'s initial output to where it is ultimately consumed, after an arbitrary number of steps through the endogenous economy. This results in the lifetime matrix (denoted `CONL` as it deals with consumption):

$$
\mathtt{CONL}_{L|A} = \mathtt{K}_{L|A} + \sum_{B_1}\mathtt{K}_{L|B_1}\mathtt{T}_{B_1|A} + \sum_{B_1,B_2}\mathtt{K}_{L|B_2}\mathtt{T}_{B_2|B_1}\mathtt{T}_{B_1|A} + \dots
$$

where the sum continues *infinitely*. There is a somewhat more compact way to write this, using the *matrix inverse*:

$$
\mathtt{CONL}_{L|A} = \sum_B \mathtt{K}_{L|B}\left(\mathtt{I} - \mathtt{T}\right)^{-1}_{B|A}
$$

where $$\mathtt{I}_{B\vert A}$$ is the identity matrix which is equal to 1 only if $$B=A$$ and 0 otherwise. This computation is performed in the notebook `GTAP_LifecycleFlows-Computation.ipynb`.

Using this lifetime matrix, we can now actually utilize our calculated values for the total resource inputs to each sector in order to compute how irrevesible processes in one region support consumption in other regions. For energy extraction, dissipation, $$\mathrm{CO}_2$$ emissions and labor, we can compute the matrices:

$$
\mathtt{EXTRCONL}_{r,i\rightarrow s,j} = \mathtt{EXTR}_{r,i}\cdot\mathtt{CONL}_{s,j|r,i}
$$

$$
\mathtt{DISSCONL}_{r,i\rightarrow s,j} = \mathtt{DISS}_{r,i}\cdot\mathtt{I}_{s,j|r,i}+\mathtt{DISS}_{r,i}\cdot\mathtt{CONL}_{s,j|r,i}
$$

$$
\mathtt{CO2CONL}_{r,i\rightarrow s,j} = \mathtt{CO2}_{r,i}\cdot\mathtt{I}_{s,j|r,i}+\mathtt{CO2}_{r,i}\cdot\mathtt{CONL}_{s,j|r,i}
$$

$$
\mathtt{LABCONL}_{r,i\rightarrow s,j} = \mathtt{LAB}_{r,i}\cdot\mathtt{CONL}_{s,j|r,i}
$$

## Investment and the circular economy

Now we will make a minor shift in notation: indices $$A,B,C$$ will still denote endogenous sectors, but endogenous has expanded to include **Consumption** and all other sectors except **Investment**. Meanwhile, $$L,M,N$$ will denote **Investment** sectors. Under this modified interpretation of our notation, we will define $$\mathtt{T}_{B\vert A}$$ and $$\mathtt{K}_{L\vert A}$$ the same as before.

The interpretation of what these matrices mean is now different. Rather than being used to infer resource flows, we interpret them more directly: for every dollar of activity in sector $$A$$, $$\mathtt{T}_{B\vert A}$$ of activity from sector $$B$$ is requuired as input (i.e. payment). This requires no physical assumptions. However, our choice of endogenous/exogenous division means assuming that all money circulating in the economy originates from an investment. $$\mathtt{K}_{L\vert A}$$ indicates how many dollars are *directly* required from investment sector $L$ to instigate a dollar of activity in $$A$$; however, even more may be required through indirect investments in intermediate industries that also feed into $$A$$'s economic activity. Tracking these indirect effects across an arbitrary number of intermediate exchanges is called *Leontief analysis* (Leontief, 1991), and it takes exactly the same form as our lifecycle assessment of consumption in the previous section:

$$
\mathtt{INVL}_{L|A} = \mathtt{K}_{L|A} + \sum_{B_1}\mathtt{K}_{L|B_1}\mathtt{T}_{B_1|A} + \sum_{B_1,B_2}\mathtt{K}_{L|B_2}\mathtt{T}_{B_2|B_1}\mathtt{T}_{B_1|A} + \dots
$$

This can, again, be written in terms of the matrix inverse:

$$
\mathtt{INVL}_{L|A} = \sum_B \mathtt{K}_{L|B}\left(\mathtt{I} - \mathtt{T}\right)^{-1}_{B|A}
$$

where $$\mathtt{I}_{B\vert A}$$ is the identity matrix. Note that while this is formally the same equation, we are dealing with a much larger and very differently structured matrix whose inverse is consequently much more difficult to calculate. We perform this computation in `GTAP_Leontief-Computation.ipynb`.

Using the Leontief matrix, we can now again utilize our calculated values for the total resource inputs to each sector–––this time to calculate how many what proportion of each resource input was instigated by dollars from each **Investment** sector. For energy extraction, dissipation, $$\mathrm{CO}_2$$ emissions and labor, we can compute the matrices:

$$
\mathtt{EXTRINVL}_{r,i\rightarrow s,j} = \mathtt{EXTR}_{r,i}\cdot\mathtt{INVL}_{s,j|r,i}
$$

$$
\mathtt{DISSINVL}_{r,i\rightarrow s,j} = \mathtt{DISS}_{r,i}\cdot\mathtt{INVL}_{s,j|r,i}
$$

$$
\mathtt{CO2INVL}_{r,i\rightarrow s,j} = \mathtt{CO2}_{r,i}\cdot\mathtt{INVL}_{s,j|r,i}
$$

$$
\mathtt{LABINVL}_{r,i\rightarrow s,j} = \mathtt{LAB}_{r,i}\cdot\mathtt{INVL}_{s,j|r,i}
$$

## Energy extraction

The first thing to look at is how much energy extraction results from a region's production processes against how much is *required* to sustain their consumption. We call this the P/C ratio:

$$
\mathtt{P/C} = \frac{\sum_{s,j}\mathtt{EXTRCONL}_{r,i\rightarrow s,j}}{\sum_{s,j}\mathtt{EXTRCONL}_{s,j\rightarrow r,i}}
$$

This quantity is based on a similar one calculated for $$\mathrm{CO}_2$$ flows in (Bergmann, 2012).
Note that this is a quantity which is only interesting because the sums over rows and columns do *not* equal one another as in an SAM; the accounting balance of economic matrices can easily conceal imbalances in resource accounting. Below, we plot the extraction P/C ratio by region. Blue indicates a high ratio (more produced than consumed–––net exporters) and gold indicates a low ratio (more consumed than produced–––net importers). Empty spaces in the graph indicate regions of the globe where `GTAP 8`'s aggregation scheme could not provide national-level data.

<iframe
  src="/assets/gtap_graphs/extrcon_ratio.html"
  style="width:100%; height:650px;"
></iframe>

Next, we compute the similar P/I ratio, which now gives the ratio of extraction used in production processes to the total amount of extraction instigated by investments originating in the region. Its interpretation is very similar to that of the P/C ratio; by and large, the results for extraction are not significantly different, except in highly peripheralized countries like Paraguay and Mongolia, which are even more intense exporters of extracted energy when measured by investment.

$$
\mathtt{P/I} = \frac{\sum_{s,j}\mathtt{EXTRINVL}_{r,i\rightarrow s,j}}{\sum_{s,j}\mathtt{EXTRINVL}_{s,j\rightarrow r,i}}
$$

<iframe
  src="/assets/gtap_graphs/extrinv_ratio.html"
  style="width:100%; height:650px;"
></iframe>

## Energy dissipation

Energy dissipation is a markedly different physical process than extraction. We will see, unsurprisingly, that it is very closely tied with $$\mathrm{CO}_2$$ emissions. Dissipation will occur in sectors with heavy industrial activity. Below, we calculate the P/C and P/I ratios on a national level. We note that the most intense exporters under the P/C ratio tend to be "emerging economies", though not all emerging economies are strong exporters.

<iframe
  src="/assets/gtap_graphs/disscon_ratio.html"
  style="width:100%; height:650px;"
></iframe>

The P/I ratio for dissipation is very different from the P/C ratio. China recedes somewhat in this metric, indicating that while the country provides embodied dissipation to meet the consumption needs of other nations, there is still local investment which retains the profits of these transactions. This is less so the case in other emerging nations like Russia, South Africa and Malaysia, where looking at investment further intensifies the outflow of embodied dissipation. This indicates that there is significant foreign investment in these nations which stimulates (and profits from) the local industry.

<iframe
  src="/assets/gtap_graphs/dissinv_ratio.html"
  style="width:100%; height:650px;"
></iframe>

## $$\mathrm{CO}_2$$ emissions

Earlier we noted that $$\mathrm{CO}_2$$ emissions would have very similar results to energy disspation; this is of course not surprising, as much energy dissipation occurs due to the burning of fossil fuels. As we can see below, the structures of the P/C ratio and P/I ratio for $$\mathrm{CO}_2$$ emissions are extremely similar to the same structures for energy dissipation. We will note that our results should be compared with those in (Bergmann, 2012) who calculated similar ratios for $$\mathrm{CO}_2$$ emissions using the `GTAP 7` database. We are using a more updated database, and out calculation of the lifetime consumption costs differs in that we excluded financial sectors from that analysis, whereas (Bergmann, 2012) did not. In spite of these differences, our results are quite comparable.

<iframe
  src="/assets/gtap_graphs/co2con_ratio.html"
  style="width:100%; height:650px;"
></iframe>

<iframe
  src="/assets/gtap_graphs/co2inv_ratio.html"
  style="width:100%; height:650px;"
></iframe>

### Labor time

Thus far, in both energy extraction and dissipation, and also in $$\mathrm{CO}_2$$ emissions, we have given much weight to industrial processes and forms of energy. Before the industrial revolution, most of the energy that powered the world was *somatic* in form–––that is, channeled through human bodies and living things–––and much energy involved in production still comes from these sources. The energy extracted from subterranean fossils and uranium deposits has been counted; the energy and other resources extracted by crops and livestock have not. The energy dissipated by machines and cars has been counted; that dissipated by the arm of the worker (and the mind of the researcher!) has not.

With the current dataset, this cannot be remedied, but an intriguing proxy can be utilized. This is the concept of labor-time. Though not energy, time is still a precious resource and is irreversibly lost when any activity is undertaken. In an earlier section we made an estimate of how much labor-time has been appropriated for use in industrial processes; this labor-time becomes embodied in the product and can be consumed like any other resource.

First, we look at the P/C and P/I ratios for regional labor. We notice in both a clear distinction (with some exceptions) between the "Global North" and "Global South", made more intense in the investment paradigm than in the consumption paradigm. The primary exception to this rule is the Middle East, which emerges as a clear importer of labor–––though this is not surprising, as so many local processes are oriented towards the extraction of oil. 

<iframe
  src="/assets/gtap_graphs/labcon_ratio.html"
  style="width:100%; height:650px;"
></iframe>

<iframe
  src="/assets/gtap_graphs/labinv_ratio.html"
  style="width:100%; height:650px;"
></iframe>

The reader may notice that the most intense importers are high-income countries and the most intense exporters are low-income countries. Recall, though that we noted our data pipeline had errors and missing data which would have tended to place *more* labor as originating in high-income regions. More accurate data may reveal an even more stark global division.

Regardless, we may use the average wage that was computed to aid in determining total labor division, and plot it against the P/C and P/I ratios. To compute the correlation between the quantities, we use the nonlinear KT correlation. The countries are colored by megaregions defined in our next section,
and sized relative to their population.

<iframe
  src="/assets/gtap_graphs/labcon_wage.html"
  style="width:100%; height:600px;"
></iframe>

Notable structures evident in both the above graph and the below one are a severe heteroskedasticity, which leads to high variance at the extreme ends of the point cloud, but which seems to narrow into a "pinch" at the midpoint, approximately where the ratios are equal to 0.9 and the average annual wage is equal to $8,000.

This point is also significant as it appears to divide the graph into four quadrants: the upper-right and lower-left quadrants about this point are virtually empty in both graphs, while almost all countries occupy wither the upper-left or lower-right quadrants. The economic significance of this point is not clear to me. 

<iframe
  src="/assets/gtap_graphs/labinv_wage.html"
  style="width:100%; height:600px;"
></iframe>