---
layout: post
title:  "Just For Fun: Laplacians and Keyline Agriculture in QGIS"
short: "Laplacians and Keylines"
date:   2021-11-29 08:00:00 -0800
homepage: /forfun/
categories: forfun 
excerpt: "Can mathematics and QGIS help keyline design? My turkey-addled mind ponders."
visible: 1
---
{% marginfigure 'duck' 'assets/img/ducks.png' "*Sic vis turkey, para duck*" %}

As Catie and I dream our future duck-and-sheep empire
during our final year of graduate school,
we've decided to divide up the labor of studying the philosophy of regenerative
and sustainable farm systems. Catie is responsible for the macro-side of things
(silvopasture, garden, animals), and I'm in charge of the micro-side (soil,
microbes, fermentation) as well as the *very* macro-side (hydrology, nutrient
cycles, carbon sequestration) which so very often loops back around to the
microscopic side of things.

{% marginfigure 'keyline' 'assets/img/keyline.png' "On this contour map of a valley, the
(highly bowed) 180' contour is the keyline, and its intersection with the dotted meridian is
the keypoint. Reproduced from 'The Keyline Plan' by P. A. Yeomans." %}

This Thanksgiving I had some good time to read about *keyline design*. Keyline
design is an approach to hydrology and landscaping which predates the more
recent permaculture movement and which, like permaculture, originated in
Australia. The chief concern of keyline design is the efficient distribution and
usage of water. It's not surprising that this would be a concern in Australia.
For my part, both my recent experiences in California---on the verge of a
full-blown ecological crisis---and the prospect of increased drought seasons in
North Carolina have convinced me that, whatever farm we build, water
conservation should be one of our first concerns.

The central concept of keyline design is the *keypoint*. Each valley in a given
area of land has a keypoint, which lies along the central meridian of the
valley, where the slope transitions from slow and flat to fast and rising. The
constant-elevation contour passing through the keypoint is called the *keyline*.
Keyline design is, in its simplest essence, design which orients itself around
these items. More specifically, it can often involve constructing dams at the
keypoint to aid in efficient irrigation, or contour-plowing parallel to the keyline, which
has the effect of distributing water from wet to dry regions and reducing
erosion.

{% marginfigure 'keyline_water' 'assets/img/keyline_waterflow.png' "
Now I've marked the contours with blue arrows denoting water flow, which is
opposite to the gradient of the landscape. The keyline at 180' passes through
the area of greatest convergence of waterflow, shaded, which can be identified
with the keypoint. This can be calculated as a local maximum of the Laplacian of
ground level." %}

Perhaps it is a side effect of the large quantity of turkey I've consumed this
week, but I began to spend some of my break time thinking about how principles of vector
calculus lie at the heart of keyline design, and may allow for quantitative aids
to its implementation. I'm sure much of this has been worked out already---but frequently
reinventing the wheel is often the stubborn fun of math.

At the meridian of the valley, the gradient of the flips its perpendicular
component, so that on either side it points towards the meridian. Where the
valley bows inward most prominently, this change in the gradient can be quite
rapid. Let's call the direction perpendicular to the meridian $$x$$. Then the
change in the gradient's perpendicular component as we move in the perpendicular
direction (denoted $$\frac{\partial^2 h}{\partial x^2}$$) is at its (locally) largest magnitude along the
meridian.

The keypoint is defined as that point, on the meridian, where we transition from
the flatter part of the valley to the steeper portion. In the flatter regions,
the magnitude of our gradient is at its minimal level, and the steeper regions
are where it reaches its maximum. Between these we can expect the derivative of
the gradient along the meridian (denoted $$\frac{\partial^2 h}{\partial y^2}$$) reaches
its largest magnitude.

Based on both of these considerations, we can expect that the *Laplacian* 
$$
\nabla^2 h = \frac{\partial^2 h}{\partial x^2} + \frac{\partial^2 h}{\partial y^2}
$$
is at its largest magnitude at the keypoint. Now we have to be more careful
here: Laplacians can take positive and negative values. Positive values
correspond to points where the gradient diverges, and negative values to those
where it converges. The gradient points uphill, so opposite to water flow; so it
is when the Laplacian is large and positive that we can expect water
*converges*. The positive local maxima of the Laplacian denote the keypoints of
the land, where water flows together and is most easily caught, but also most
likely to cause erosion.

Now we can get to the fun part! Because the next natural question is if we can
use publically available elevation data to identify the location of keypoints,
using a Laplacian filter. USGS provides 3-arcsecond resolution digital elevation
maps, and `scipy` provides a fast Laplacian filter that can be applied on large
images. So let's throw the two together!

{% maincolumn 'assets/img/roanoke-lap.png' 
'Seen through a Laplacian filter: the region between the 36th and 37th parallels
and the 79th and 80th meridians, which contains the Roanoke and Haw basins and
crosses the border of North Carolina and Virginia. Red denotes locations of
divergence, and blue locations of convergence. Right-click and "open image" to
view a larger version.' %}

The result is striking. It's actually my new wallpaper. But can we use this to
discover keylines?

Using the USGS data, I also generated a contour map of Catie's family's farm,
and overlaid the two in QGIS. The advantage of this is that we can freely start
to sketch out the keyline design with the aid of the quantitative background.

{% maincolumn 'assets/img/QGIS1.png' 
'Hunting for keypoints and keylines!' %}

You'll notice that at this resolution things get quite grainy. In particular,
precisely identifying the optimal values of the Laplacian may not be quite
possible, which is disappointing. However, what we have may be good enough,
and may be especially helpful when used in conjunction with on-farm analysis.

QGIS makes this particularly simple. Once a potential keypoint and its keyline
contour are identified, the contour can be traced out and duplicated, allowing
the tracing of parallel lines for off-contour irrigation above the keyline. This
off-contour irrigation redirects the water, as it tries to gather in the valley,
towards the ridges, increasing overall soil inundation while delaying runoff and
reducing erosion.

{% maincolumn 'assets/img/QGIS2.png' 
'Red curves indicate candidate keylines, while blue lines are the parallel
contours, which criss-cross the higher contours, redistributing water flow.' %}

Well, there's a fair way to go to make these tools helpful, and I won't be
able to utilize them myself for a while yet. But it's always fun to learn
new things through a familiar lens---in this case, keylines through Laplacians!